upon that part of france which is still in dispute, and he might hope to reach the famous city of avignon, where dwells our blessed father, the prop
of christendom." "and then?" "then he would pass through the land of the almains and the great roman empire, and so to the country of the huns and
of the lithuanian pagans, beyond which lies the great city of constantine and the kingdom of the unclean followers of mahmoud." "and beyond that, fair son?" "beyond that, fair son?" "beyond that
is jerusalem and the holy land, and the great river which bath its source in the garden of eden." "and then?" "nay, good father, i cannot tell. methinks
the end of the world is not far from there." "then we can still find something to teach thee, alleyne," said the abbot complaisantly. "know that many strange
nations lie betwixt there and the end of the world. there is the country of the amazons, and the country of the dwarfs, and the country of the
fair but evil women who slay with beholding, like the basilisk. beyond that again is the kingdom of preset john and of the great cham. these things i
know for very sooth, for i had them from that pious christian and valiant knight, sir john de mandeville, who stopped twice at beaulieu on his way to
and from southampton, and discoursed to us concerning what he had seen from the reader 5 desk in the refectory, until there was many a good brother who
got neither bit nor sup, so stricken were they by his strange tales." "i would fain know, father," asked the young man, "what there may be at the
end of the world?" "there are some things," replied the abbot gravely, "into which it was never intended that we should inquire. but you have a long road
before you. whither will you first turn?" "to my brother s at minstead. if he be indeed an ungodly and violent man, there is the more need that
i should seek him out and see whether i cannot turn him to better ways." the abbot shook his head. "the socman of minstead hath earned an evil
name over the country side," he said. "if you must go to him, see at least that he doth not turn you from the narrow path upon which
you have learned to tread. but you are in god s keeping, and godward should you ever look in danger and in trouble. above all, shun the snares
of women, for they are ever set for the foolish feet of the young. kneel down, my child, and take an old man s blessing." alleyne edricson bent
his head while the abbot poured out his heartfelt supplication that heaven would watch over this young soul, now going forth into the darkness and danger of the
world. it was no mere form for either of them. to them the outside life of mankind did indeed seem to be one of violence and of sin,
beset with physical and still more with spiritual danger. heaven, too, was very near to them in those days. god s direct agency was to be seen in
the thunder and the rainbow, the whirlwind and the lightning. to the believer, clouds of angels and confessors, and martyrs, armies of the sainted and the saved, were
ever stooping over their struggling brethren upon earth, raising, encouraging, and supporting them. it was then with a lighter heart and a stouter courage that the young man
turned from the abbot s room, while the latter, following him to the stair-head, finally commended him to the protection of the holy julian, patron of travellers. underneath,
in the porch of the abbey, the monks had gathered to give him a last god-speed. many had brought some parting token by which he should remember them.
there was brother bartholomew with a crucifix of rare carved ivory, and brother luke with a white-backed psalter adorned with golden bees, and brother francis with the "saying
of the innocents' most daintily set forth upon vellum. all these were duly packed away deep in the traveller s scrip, and above them old pippin-faced brother athanasius
had placed a parcel of simnel bread and rammel cheese with a small flask of the famous blue-sealed abbey wine. so amid hand-shakings and laughings and blessings 
edricson turned his back upon beaulieu at the turn of the road he stopped and gazed back. there was the wide-spread building which he knew so well, the
abbot s house, the long church, the cloisters with their line of arches, all bathed and mellowed in the evening sun. there too was the broad sweep of
the river exe, the old stone well, the canopied niche of the virgin, and in the centre of all the cluster of white-robed figures  who waved their hands
to him. a sudden mist swam up before the young man s eyes, and he turned away upon his journey with a heavy heart and a choking throat
It is not, however, in the nature of things that a lad of twenty, with young life glowing in his veins and all the wide world before